+++
title = "Advent of Code 2025 Day 4— Racket"
date = 2025-12-04T05:00:00+00:00
weight = 2509
+++

## Marketing Pitch and Impressions

> ***Mature:*** *Racket is a mature and stable product.  From the beginning, it
> has supported cross-platform graphical programming (Windows, macOS, Linux).*
>
> ***Practical:*** *Racket includes a rich set of libraries, covering the full
> range from web server apps to mathematics and scientific simulation software.*
>
> ***Extensible:*** *In Racket, programmers define their own loops with powerful
> macros.  Indeed, these macros are so powerful that programmers make entire
> domain-specific languages as libraries.  No tools, no Makefiles required.*
>
> ***Robust:*** *Racket is the first language to support higher-order software
> contracts and safe gradual typing.  Programmers can easily deploy these tools
> to harden their software.*
>
> ***Polished:*** *Racket comes with support for major editors.  The main bundle
> includes an innovative and extensible interactive development environment that
> has inspired other IDE projects.*
>
> *— [racket-lang.org](https://racket-lang.org/)*

The syntax relies on parenthesised S-expressions, which is likely the single
most disliked feature of lisp family languages.

Visual Studio Code support is for Racket is excellent.  Racket also has it's own
excellent IDE.

## The Code

Use of the `λ` character in place of the `lambda` symbol is cute and makes the
code more compact.  I probably should have used `let` instead of `define` in
`main` too.

I parse all the input lines into a set of 2D points.  This makes existence
checking easier, and we don't have to worry about grid boundaries as much.

For part 1, we just count points in the set that have less than 5 points in
their neighbourhood (ie 4 + self).

For part 2, we iterate over the set, totalling and removing accessible rolls
until there are no more accessible rolls.

{{% code file="code-aoc-2025/d04.rkt" language="rkt" %}}

## Install Racket and run

```sh
# I installed via Homebrew
brew install --cask racket

# Official installer (Linux/macOS/Windows)
# https://download.racket-lang.org/

# Execute the code
racket d04.rkt
```
