+++
title = "Advent of Code 2025 Day 1— Nim"
date = 2025-12-01T05:00:00+00:00
weight = 2512
+++

## Marketing Pitch and Impressions

The Nim website describes the language like this:

> *Nim is a statically typed compiled systems programming language.  It*
> *combines successful concepts from mature languages like Python, Ada* *and
> Modula.*
>
> *— [nim-lang.org](https://nim-lang.org/)*

There are a few additional interesting points worth noting:

- Compiles to C, C++, or JavaScript, presumably making targeting new
  architectures easier.
- Automatic memory management via ARC or ORC, where ORC is ARC with cycles.
- Compile-time Function Execution (CTFE), which permits compile-time computation
  and AST manipulation.
- Syntax is similar to Python, using indentation for code blocks.

I quite like the ideas behind Nim.  It has a decent library, automatic memory
management, modern tooling and compiles to native code.  The syntax is easy to
read and pleasant to work with.

Unfortunately though, I can't really see a compelling reason to use it over more
mainstream languages.  Perhaps the more compelling use cases would take
advantage of Nim's very strong metaprogramming features.

Visual Studio Code support for Nim is excellent.

## The Code

The code itself is straightforward and easy to read.  Having the `euclMod`
function available in the base library is a nice touch.  Also note the indexing
from the end of the string using `^` in `positions(…)`.

The code itself is pretty straightforward.  It generates a list of start and
unwrapped end positions for each move.  For part 1 we just count the cases where
`end mod 100 == 0`.  For part 2, we count the number of revolutions made, with
an additional adjustment for passing zero turning to the left.

{{% code file="code-aoc-2025/d01.nim" language="nim" %}}

## Install Nim and run

The recommended way to install Nim is via `choosenim`, though most package
managers work as well.  I used Homebrew.

```sh
# I installed via Homebrew
brew install nim

# Website recommends "choosenim"
curl https://nim-lang.org/choosenim/init.sh -sSf | sh

# Compile and run
nim r d01.nim
```
