+++
title = "Advent of Code 2025 Day 6— C++"
date = 2025-12-06T05:00:00+00:00
weight = 2507
+++

## Marketing Pitch and Impressions

> *C++ was designed with systems programming and embedded, resource-constrained
> software and large systems in mind, with performance, efficiency, and
> flexibility of use as its design highlights.  C++ has also been found useful
> in many other contexts, with key strengths being software infrastructure and
> resource-constrained applications, including desktop applications, video
> games, servers (e.g., e-commerce, web search, or databases), and
> performance-critical applications (e.g., telephone switches or space probes).*
>
> *— [wikipedia.org](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B)*

C++ is a surprisingly long-lived language having been around for more than 40
years now.  It's core philosophy is to provide developers with maximum degree of
control over system resources, including CPU and memory.  Unsurprisingly, this
level of control comes with significant complexity.  One of the often heard
maxims in the C++ world is "you only pay for what you use."

Visual Studio Code support for C++ is excellent, as you might expect.

## The Code

I've written quite a bit of C++ code over the years, but I have not used it much
recently.  I was looking forward to putting the code together for this problem
but as it turned out, this was one of the more fiddly problems to solve this
year.

The solution makes use of `std::ranges` and `std::views` to form a processing
pipeline.  I've implemented a custom pipeline operator to apply the supply the
applied operation to the provided numbers.

Both part 1 and part 2 are calculated in the same way, but differing
orientations.  For both parts, columnar boundaries are established.  Then part 1
applies the supplied operator to horizontal substrings arranged in rows.  Part 2
applies the same operator to vertical substrings arranged in columns.

{{% code file="code-aoc-2025/d06.cpp" language="c++" %}}

## Install C++ and run

You need a recent compiler to support the C++23 standard library features.

C++ doesn't have a standard package manager, so we just compile and execute.

```sh
# You probably have this installed already

# Execute the code
g++ -Wall -Wpedantic -std=c++23 -O -o d06 d06.cpp && ./d06
```
